Article: profiling with rank functions (#163)
microsoft/wpa: vignettes/profiles-with-rank.Rmd

---
title: "Identifying relevant groups with rank functions"
author: "Carlos Morales-Torrado"
date: "2021-06-30"
tags:
- rank
- profiles
categories: R
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>",
  fig.width=8,
  fig.height=8
)
```

## Introduction

> This article introduces the **rank functions** that are included in the [**wpa** R package](https://microsoft.github.io/wpa). These functions are unique, as they are designed to:
> 
> 1. Scan a full person dataset, and
> 
> 2. Automatically identify groups that are worth investigating (i.e. those, with the highest or lowest values in a metric of choice). 

Reviewer: May make this line more succinct here:

```suggestion
This article introduces the **rank functions** that are included in the [**wpa** R package](https://microsoft.github.io/wpa). These are powerful functions that scan a full person query dataset and automatically identify groups of interest, i.e. those exhibiting the highest or lowest values for a metric in the population.
```

This article is divided in four sections. After this introduction, section two introduces the rank functions generally an how to apply them to person query output. In the third section, we explore their use  for profiling - i.e. to identify in which groups are specific behaviour is most common. The final section, includes a list of additional use cases that can benefit from this method. 

## Rank Functions

### Baseline analysis

To get started, let's open a new session in R and load the [**wpa** R package](https://microsoft.github.io/wpa). We will also use **dplyr** to facilitate data manipulation:

```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
library(wpa)
library(dplyr)
```

Using the `sq_data` demo dataset (it contains a weekly person query output) let's use the `collaboration_rank()` function:

```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}

> sq_data %>% 
> collaboration_rank(return="table")

Reviewer: Just adding indentation and spacing here for style best practices:
```suggestion
sq_data %>% 
    collaboration_rank(return = "table")
```

```

> The output table contains the results from the automatic group exploration. The rank function has taken all available organisational attributes in this dataset ("FunctionType", "Organization", "LevelDesignation", and "IsActive") and calculated the average collaboration hours for each group within each one of them. The table shows the results for all groups analysed, ranked them from highest to lowest. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output table contains the results from the automatic group exploration. The rank function has taken all available organisational attributes in this dataset (`"FunctionType"`, `"Organization"`, `"LevelDesignation"`, and `"IsActive"`) and calculated the average collaboration hours for each group within each organisational attribute. The table shows the analysed results for all groups, ranked from highest to lowest. 
```
Updating the flow

To see the entire table, we can add the function `print` to the command above. 

```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
sq_data %>% 
collaboration_rank(return="table") %>%  
print(n=30)
```

This analysis shows us that the 82 employees labeled as **"FunctionType = Sales"** have the largest collaboration hours, with a weekly average of 31 hours. In second place are those in **"Organization = Inventory Management"** with 26.2 hours. On the lower end, the employees labelled as **"Organization = Biz Dev"** appear to have the lowest collaboration time. 

This output is useful to identify groups that are worth investigating (e.g. "Sales"). It also reveals that splits by "FunctionType" and "Organization" are more interesting than those by "LevelDesignation", as they have more variability (All groups in "LevelDesignation" have  relatively similar levels of collaboration, between 18 and 22 hours a week). 

Rank functions can also display this information in visual form. We can get that by changing the `return` argument from "table" to "plot":

> ```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
> sq_data %>% 
> collaboration_rank(return="plot")

Reviewer: Again adding indentation and spacing: 

```suggestion
```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
sq_data %>% 
    collaboration_rank(return = "plot")
```

```

The resulting plot contains the same results we explored above. Each row corresponds to a different organisational attribute and the bubbles show how the population is split across different subgroups (bubble size is proportional to the number of individuals). The five groups in orange are clearly the ones spending most time in collaboration, with Sales way ahead in the front. 

### Combining two HR variables

With our baseline analysis we uncovered that the 82 employees labeled as  **"FunctionType = Sales" ** have the highest average collaboration hours. However, it is likely that not all of these employees in this group are equally affected. Furthermore, there may be pockets in other parts of this population that may be experiencing similar levels of collaboration, but that are hidden given the  structure of the organisational data (for example, the managers within a particular business unit).

The rank includes an additional mode called "combine", that allows us to take our analysis one step further.

```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}

> sq_data %>% 
> collaboration_rank(return="table",   mode = "combine")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sq_data %>% 
    collaboration_rank(return = "table", mode = "combine")
```

```

The output table contains similar results from the automatic group exploration above, but we now have more granularity. The function has  created smaller groups by combining two distinct groups from the HR attributes in scope. In this case, it seems that the 28 managers in Sales are the worst affected group, with a weekly average of 33.7 hours in collaboration per week (That sounds like a lot of meetings!). 

### Additional functions 

Rank functions are available for multiple families: 

* afterhours_rank()

* email_rank()

* meeting_rank()

* one2one_rank()

* workloads_rank()

For other metrics, you can use the more general version:

> * create_rank()

Reviewer: Adding backtick formatting:

```suggestion
* `afterhours_rank()`

* `email_rank()`

* `meeting_rank()`

* `one2one_rank()`

* `workloads_rank()`

For other metrics, you can use the more general version:

* `create_rank()`
```
